Section five Mexico City station
reporting of information concerning
Oswald after the assassination a
reporting of information concerning the
photograph of the Mexico mystery man
even though some people in the station
clearly disassociated the photograph
that was described in M EXI 6 4 5 3 from
Oswald after receiving the October 11th
cable it is clear that some people still
considered it possible for some reason
that the photograph was of Oswald in
October and Goodpasture had argued this
very point with Winston Scott on the day
of the assassination the Mexico City
station cabled headquarters that it was
sending as soon as possible copies of
only visitor 2 so vem 28th of october
who could be identical with oswald the
date was later corrected to read first
october mr. scott was not the only
person in the mexico station who still
thought that the photo could possibly be
oswald redacted testified on this point
quote question as of the day of the
assassination you thought that there was
still a possibility that there was a
photograph of Oswald answer indeed as I
recall we tried to get that photograph
to headquarters as fast as we could as
it turned out it wasn't necessary to
send it but that was our intention end
quote
the photograph was sent to Dallas where
special agent Odum of the FBI showed it
to mrs. marguerite oswald on 23rd of
november 1963 mrs. Oswald would later
claim it was a photograph of Jack Ruby
beginning a period of controversy and
uncertainty about this photograph that
has continued to this day
the interaction of the Warren Commission
and the CIA on this question is detailed
in another section of this report on
23rd of November Mexico informed
headquarters that quote it's obvious
photos sent to Dallas or not identical
with Lee Oswald end quote since the time
of the assassination this man has been
identified as
yuri ivanovitch Musca love a soviet KGB
officer the identification is
unconfirmed and comes from only one
source in any case it is unlikely that
this man had any connection with oswald
outside of the mistaken belief of
several CIA officers in mexico be
reporting of information concerning Lee
Harvey Oswald from the electronic
intercept operation aimed at the Soviet
embassy the first cable that Mexico sent
to headquarters after the assassination
referred headquarters to the cable
traffic concerning Oswald that had
occurred prior to the assassination
headquarters replied that they had also
noted the connection footnote dir 84 802
November 22nd 1963 paragraph 1 the
sequence of the cables can be determined
in that they were numbered sequentially
as they were sent in this regard it
should be noted that this system can
indicate the order in which the cables
were sent but not the order in which
they were written because at least in
Mexico several of the station officers
were drafting and sending cables hence
the order of writing them may not be the
same as the order in which they were
sent in footnote the cable traffic on
the day of the assassination and the
early traffic from the following day
deal almost exclusively with the
photograph of the person who later
became known as the Mexico mystery man
the first cable obviously referred to
the October first contact and brought it
to headquarters attention by referring
headquarters to M EXI six four five
three the first cable that specifically
refers to the transcripts occurred on
the following day headquarters cabled
Mexico that it was important that the
station review all transcripts since
27th of September to locate all material
possibly pertinent the cable went on to
instruct the station to send the full
transcripts and original tapes to
headquarters by special courier the
cable also asks if the original tapes
are still available
this committee has not been able to
determine how the CIA headquarters new
on 23rd of November 1963 that a review
of the tap material should begin with
the production from 27th of September
the day Oswald first appeared at the
Soviet and Cuban embassies there is no
record that headquarters had been
informed of the September 27th visits
prior to this cable having been sent it
is possible as some witnesses have
suggested that his information was
provided to CIA headquarters by the FBI
in Washington if that is the case then
it merely shifts the question this may
indicate that the CIA headquarters was
aware of the September 27th visits prior
to the assassination an even stronger
inference is that they were aware of
those visits at least by the day after
the assassination the manner in which
they learned of these visits by that
date has not been determined it is
possible that headquarters was informed
by telephone even though witnesses
generally denied that there was a
telephone communication between Mexico
City and headquarters at the time of the
assassination there is strong evidence
that there was such communication on at
least two instances as will become
evident the transcripts were cabled to
headquarters that same day it is not
clear why headquarters asked that the
transcripts and tapes if they existed be
sent to headquarters by special courier
as opposed to cabling the transcripts
which would have been faster there is no
record that indicates that these
transcripts of Oswald's calls were sent
to headquarters by special courier on
the 23rd the Mexico City station
reported all of the substance of Oswald
conversations to headquarters by cable
logically one would expect that since
the circumstantial evidence indicates
that these conversations were linked to
Oswald prior to the assassination that
they would all have been reported in one
cable especially in light of the request
from headquarters in dir 84 886 at this
point a court
to the files and records made available
to the HSC a staff by the CIA the Mexico
City station had informed headquarters
of only the September 28th and the
October 1st 10:45 conversations it
should be noted that the October 1st
10:45 conversation makes reference to
the fact that Oswald was also at the
Embassy on September 28th the next cable
that Mexico City sent to headquarters
said in part other than info already
sent Rios Wald's connection with Soviet
and Cuban embassies no other info
available the next cable reports a
literal transcription of the September
28th and October 1st 10:45 conversations
the next cable that refers to the
transcripts of Oswald's conversations
reports the September 27th 10:30 call
the September 27th 405 call the
September 27th 426 call the October 1st
1031 call and the October 3rd call with
this cable Mexico City informed
headquarters of all the substantive
information available from the Soviet
embassy electronic surveillance footnote
HSC a staff have wondered whether or not
the Mexico City station was entirely
forthcoming of their own will with
headquarters this speculation was based
on three pieces of information the first
is the report in M EXI 7:02 for that
headquarters had all the available
information the second is a note from
Wynn Scott on the routing and record
sheet for M EXI 7:03 3 which says quote
I had a call from Washington John Celso
at 1620 hours on 23 X I I told John
Celso at 1630 hours our time on 23 X I
that this would be unwrapped to him end
quote
the third is a cable reporting that on
the 23rd when Scott had an urgent call
to see the President of Mexico the cable
reports that Scott expected the
president to express his condolences
over the assassination but quote
developed that
redacted had located call to Soviet
embassy of Lee Oswald made on 28th of
September redacted the committee
declines to speculate that the Mexico
City station was possibly considering
not reporting all the information
available to them it was considered that
this may have been contemplated in order
to protect themselves from a charge
about their failure to report the
information prior to the assassination
redacted hence the full report followed
very shortly after the meeting between
the Mexican President and win Scott and
immediately after Scott discussed the
situation with his nominal superior in
Washington by telephone
Scott's superior was asked about this he
said that he did not remember the
substance of his telephone call to win
Scott on the 23rd HSC a deposition of
John cell so May 16th 1978 page 88 quote
I do not have any idea why I called I
may have been ordered to call him on any
number of things end quote
he was also asked about Scott's meeting
with the Mexican president quote you get
a psychological question the chief of
station is called in to speak to
redacted there had been a big fight when
the new ambassador got there no it
wasn't that it was a very peculiar
situation in Mexico whereby the redacted
this caused no great problem with the
then ambassador whose name I have
forgotten question Thomas Mann answer
yes he was a very fine guy and
recognized the usefulness of this
arrangement the next ambassador mr.
Freeman redacted so the result was
eventually Winston Scott and ambassador
Freeman went to the White House and
talked to President Johnson and
straightened the whole thing out in
favor of Winston Scott so Scott is just
remarking that it is interesting that
redacted question he
have been since it was a redacted answer
yes but you do not always know whether
he was informed I think we always knew
he was informed it is just significant
that the person calls you in and says
here is some intelligence about the
Kennedy thing end quote
HSC a deposition of John Celso May 16
1978 pages 83 and 84 when Scot indicated
that he was going to write a memorandum
concerning his meeting with the
President of Mexico routing and records
sheet for M EXI 7 0 to 8 November 23rd
if mr. Scott wrote such a memo it has
not been made available to the HSC a
David Phillips who after serving in
Mexico went on to accumulate quite an
impressive record as a chief of station
in several countries himself told
committee investigators that a
Memorandum of this sort along with other
sensitive information would be the type
of thing that when Scott probably kept
in his private safe David a Philips
interview August 24th 1978 page 10 mr.
Phillips added that he did not know what
happened to mr. Scott's safe after he
died but he had heard vague stories
about someone finding a lot of documents
that Scott had kept and footnote Mexico
City also informed headquarters on
November 24th 1964 that the tapes from
the period in which Oswald had visited
the Soviet and Cuban embassies had been
erased a cable on the previous day had
informed headquarters that it was
probable that the Oswald tapes had been
erased an earlier cable that same day
reported that station unable compare
voice as first tape erased prior receipt
of second call this would imply that the
tape of the 28th of September
conversation which may not have been
received at the station until the 30th
or the 1st of October was destroyed
before the tape of the conversation on
the 1st of October was received in the
station on that same day in light of the
standard operating procedures in effect
in the
at that time that possibility is highly
unlikely in view of what is now known
about the standard operating procedures
and about the station's actions prior to
the assassination the station's
confusing and somewhat contradictory
reporting after the assassination is
strange it is possible that these
confusions and contradictions arose out
of the crisis atmosphere at the station
and the rush to report information this
committee has not found any solid
evidence that there were sinister
qualities in the reporting after the
assassination see Silvia Duran when
President John F Kennedy was
assassinated on November 22nd 1963 the
United States investigative agencies FBI
CIA Secret Service etc were asked to
investigate the assassination when the
Central Intelligence Agency's Mexico
City station remembered that Lee Harvey
Oswald had visited Mexico City during
late September and early October it
reviewed the electronic surveillance
files and found evidence of phone calls
to the Soviet embassy made September
27th September 28th and October 1st that
could have been made by Oswald footnote
for example ma xi7 0 to 3 reports that a
voice comparison was not done while M
EXI 7 0 to 5 implies that one was done
and a year later and Goodpasture noted
on a newspaper article that such a
comparison was done note also the M EXI
7:02 4 reported that HQ had all the
available information when in fact all
conversations were reported in a later
cable M EXI 7 0 3 3 and footnote review
of the electronic surveillance files
also produced telephone calls on
September 27 1963 between the Russian
consul and Sylvia Duran a secretary at
the Cuban consulate where Oswald was
discussed in addition the Mexico City
station found a September 28 1963 phone
call from Sylvia Duran to the Soviet
consulate where
Sylvia Duran stated that there was an
American citizen at the Cuban consulate
who had previously visited the Soviet
consulate a final phone call was made on
October 1st 1963 where the alleged
Oswald identified himself was also found
on November 23rd 1963 the Mexico City
station determined that it would request
the Mexican government with whom it had
a good relationship to arrest
Sylvia Duran as Sylvia Duran was a
Mexican citizen she did not have
diplomatic immunity
because she might shed some light on the
circumstances surrounding the
assassination the Mexico City station
sent a note to the go burner she own
head Luis echeverria with Sylvia Duran's
address her mother's address her
brother's address her license-plate
number her home phone number her place
of work and a request that she be
arrested immediately the Mexico City
station also suggested that Duran be
held incommunicado until she could be
questioned on the matter the Mexico City
station did not receive prior
authorization from CIA headquarters to
request the arrest of Sylvia Duran by
Mexican authorities headquarters feared
that a request to arrest mr. an
would jeopardize the clandestine
relationship between certain Mexican
government officials and the CIA if it
were disclosed that Americans were
behind Duran's arrest John Celso chief
of Western Hemisphere stationed at
Langley headquarters telephoned Winston
Scott the Mexico City chief of station
and requested that Sylvia Duran not be
arrested scott told cell so that he
could not rescind the request and that
headquarters should already have
received a cable stating that Sylvia
Duran had been arrested after Winston
Scott's conversation with John sell so
Scott called Louise at Chavarria and
stated that the Mexico City station
desired that all information received
from Duran be forwarded immediately to
the Mexico City station and that her
arrest and statements not be
communicated to any leftist groups
on November 27th 1963 the Mexican
government forwarded to the Mexico City
Station a copy of Silvia Duran's 10 page
signed statement it said quote upon
learning about the assassination she and
her husband speculated that President
Kennedy might have been assassinated for
racial reasons when she became aware
that the assassin was Lee Harvey Oswald
she ascertained that it was the same man
who approximately two months prior had
been to the Cuban consulate to solicit
an in transit visa to Russia having
taken his name from the special
documentation he presented she knew that
he was married to a Russian woman and
belonged to the fair play for Cuba
committee she checked the data in the
consulate archives and became certain
that it was the same individual who was
blond short dressed uh nelligan tlie and
whose face turned red when angry the
Consul had denied the visa because to
obtain an in transit visa from the Cuban
government it was imperative that he
previously obtained a visa from the
Soviet consulate
since obtaining a visa from the Soviets
took four months and Oswald's Mexican
visa expired soon Oswald was advised
that he cede the Soviet Consul and
calling the person in charge of that
office the Soviet official told her that
they would have to consult Moscow which
would take four months that afternoon
Oswald returned to the Cuban consulate
and Sylvia Duran confirmed that he could
get a Cuban visa only after he received
a Russian visa
she gave Oswald her name and business
phone number but never gave him her
address because she had no reason to
give it to him
the only aid she could give Oswald was
advising that he see the Soviet Consul
and calling the person in charge of that
office she knew that phoning the Soviet
consulate was not one of her duties and
that if she did so she did it only to
help Oswald
she gave Oswald her business phone
number only because he would have to
call subsequently to check whether he
had obtained a visa he never called back
and quote Silvia Duran released on
November 24th 1963 was re-arrested
November 27th 1963 when the Mexican
government alleged that she was
attempting to leave Mexico for travel to
Havana according to the Mexican
officials who detained Duran a second
time there was no addition to her story
the Mexico City station forwarded
Duran's 10 page signed a statement
to headquarters on November 27 1963 the
following day headquarters sent a
clarification cable to the Mexico City
Station seeking to ensure that neither
Silvia Duran nor the Cubans would have
any basis for believing that the
Americans were behind her re-arrest the
cable stated we want the Mexican
authorities to take the responsibility
for the whole affair when the Central
Intelligence Agency began to work with
the Warren Commission headquarters
cabled the Mexico City Station that its
plan and passing information to the
Warren Commission was to eliminate
mention of telephone taps in order to
protect their continuing operations
headquarters cabled that it would rely
on Silvia Duran's statements and on the
consular files which the Soviets gave
the State Department headquarters
stressed that exact detailed information
from redacted and redacted penetration
agents in the Cuban embassy on what
Silvia Duran and other officials had
said about Oswald's visit and his
dealings would be valuable and usable
corroborate of evidence when the Central
Intelligence Agency forwarded to the
Warren Commission a copy of Duran's
signed statement it read as follows
quote she remembered that Lee Harvey
Oswald was the name of an American who
had come to the Cuban consulate to
obtain a visa to travel to Cuba in
transit to Russia the latter part of
September or the early part of October
of this year and in support of his
application had shown his passport in
which it was noted that he had lived in
that country for a period of three years
his labor card from the same country
written in the Russian language and
letters in that same language
he had presented evidence that he was
married to a Russian woman and also that
he was apparently the leader of an
organization in the city of New Orleans
claiming that he should be accepted as a
friend of the Cuban Revolution
accordingly the Dec Laurent complying
with her duties took down all of the
information and completed the
appropriate application form and the
declaration for Mele telephone to the
Russian consulate with the intention of
doing what she could to facilitate
issuance of the Russian visa to Lee
Harvey Oswald
however they told her that there would
be a delay of about four months in
processing the case which annoyed the
applicant since according to his
statement he was in a great hurry to
obtain visas that would enable him to
travel to Russia insisting on his right
to do so in view of his background and
his loyalty and his activities on behalf
of the Cuban movement the deque Laurent
was unable to recall accurately whether
or not the applicant told her he was a
member of the Communist Party but he did
say that his wife was then in New York
City and would follow him Senora Duran
stated that when Oswald understood that
it was not possible to give him a Cuban
visa without his first having obtained
the Russian visa he became very excited
or angry and accordingly the affiant
called consul askew who came out and
began a heated discussion in English
with Oswald that concluded with ask you
telling him that if it were up to him he
would not give him the visa and a person
of his type was harming the Cuban
Revolution rather than helping it it
being understood that in their
conversation they were talking about the
Russian socialist revolution and not the
Cuban oswald maintained that he had two
reasons for requesting that his visa be
issued promptly and they were one that
his tourist permit in Mexico was about
to expire and the other that he had to
get to Russia as quickly as possible
despite her annoyance the deck Laurent
gave Oswald a paper in which she put
down her name Sylvia Duran and the
number of the telephone at the consulate
which is 11 28 47 and the visa
application was processed anyway it was
sent to the Ministry of Foreign
Relations of Cuba from which a routine
reply was received some 15 to 30 days
later approving the visa but on the
condition that the Russian visa be
obtained first although she does not
recall whether or not Oswald later
telephoned her at the consulate number
that she gave him and quote the Central
Intelligence Agency had relied on
Duran's statements but had deleted
Duran's description of Oswald as blonde
and short it had also excised Duran's
statement quote the only age she could
give Oswald was advising that he see the
Soviet consul and calling the person in
charge of that office end quote
which alluded to Oswald asking for some
type of aid at the Cuban consulate in
addition mr. Ann's strong statement he
never called her back was changed to she
does not recall whether or not
Oswald later telephoned her at the
consulate number that she gave him had
the statements been included the Warren
Commission's conclusions would not have
seemed as strong the Warren Commission
staff was not completely satisfied with
mr. rands 10-page signed a statement
obtained by the Mexican authorities W
David Slauson wrote quote we then
discussed the problem of interviewing
Soviet Iran we pointed out that our only
interest in witnesses in Mexico other
than Duran was to get their formal
testimony for authentication purposes
this was not true of Duran however
because she had been interviewed only by
the Mexican police and we considered
that interview inadequate I should point
out that we do not consider it totally
inadequate however it is only on details
such as Oswald's physical appearance
side comments or remarks he may have
made etcetera that we would like to
interrogate mrs. Duran further on the
essential point of whether or not his
contacts with the embassy consisted of
anything other than an attempt to travel
to Cuba Silvia Duran's now
has probably been exhausted end quote
the Warren Commission staffs attempts to
interview mr. Wran never succeeded mr.
an was not interviewed by Americans
until 1976 when two reporters from the
Washington Post interviewed her On June
6th 1978 representatives of the House
Select Committee on assassinations
interviewed mr. an in Mexico City